technical terms: expectation and execution engine (#4094)
great-expectations/great_expectations: docs/terms/expectation.md

id: expectation
hoverText: A verifiable assertion about data.
---
import UniversalMap from '/docs/images/universal_map/_universal_map.mdx';
import TechnicalTag from '../term_tags/_tag.mdx';
import SetupHeader from '/docs/images/universal_map/_um_setup_header.mdx'
import ConnectHeader from '/docs/images/universal_map/_um_connect_header.mdx';
import CreateHeader from '/docs/images/universal_map/_um_create_header.mdx';
import ValidateHeader from '/docs/images/universal_map/_um_validate_header.mdx';

<UniversalMap setup='inactive' connect='inactive' create='active' validate='active'/> 

## Overview

### Definition

An Expectation is a verifiable assertion about data. 

### Features and promises

> Great Expectations is a framework for defining Expectations and running them against your data. Like assertions in traditional Python unit tests, Expectations provide a flexible, declarative language for describing expected behavior. Unlike traditional unit tests, Great Expectations applies Expectations to data instead of code. For example, you could define an Expectation that a column contain no null values, and Great Expectations would run that Expectation against your data, and report if a null value was found.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Great Expectations is a framework for defining Expectations and running them against your data. Like assertions in traditional Python unit tests, Expectations provide a flexible, declarative language for describing expected behavior. Unlike traditional unit tests, Great Expectations applies Expectations to data instead of code. For example, you could define an Expectation that a column contains no null values, and Great Expectations would run that Expectation against your data, and report if a null value was found.
```

> Expectations *enhance communication* about your data and *improve quality* for data applications. Using Expectations helps reduce trips to domain experts and avoids leaving insights about data on the "cutting room floor."

Reviewer: Love this! I also like to say something about "Expectations help you take the implicit assumptions about your data and make them explicit"

Author: That will be added into the paragraph at line 26 in the next commit.

### Relationship to other objects

> Expectations are grouped into <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="expectation_suite" text="Expectation Suites" />, which are in turn stored in an <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="expectation_store" text="Expectation Store" />.  <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="profiler" text="Profilers" /> will analyze data in order to generate Expectations, and <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="checkpoint" text="Checkpoints" /> rely on Expectation Suites (and the Expectations contained therein) to <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="validation" text="Validate" /> data.

Reviewer: The hover definition of Expectation Store doesn't quite fit the language of the sentence. You may want to adjust the sentence or the definition.

Author: Adjusted this accordingly; the change will be in the next commit.

## Use cases

<CreateHeader/>

> Expectations are obviously a fundamental component of the Create Expectations step in working with Great Expectations.  It is when you are creating Expectations that you will have the most direct interaction with them.  For further information on this process, please see [our overview on the Create Expectations process](../guides/expectations/create_expectations_overview.md), and [our related how-to guides](../guides/expectations/index.md).

Reviewer: You may want a note in here about editing Expectations. Expectations are not meant to be static - they will be iterated on as data and the understanding of those change, and so they may need to be interacted with after Creation.

Author: I've added this mention.  It will show up in the next commit.

<ValidateHeader/>

> When you create your Checkpoints, you will be able to configure them to use specific Expectation Suites.  Other than setting up this configuration (or arranging to pass Expectation Suites at runtime) you will not need to directly interact with the Expectations themselves.  Instead, when you run your Checkpoint it will handle using the Expectations in any of its Expectation Suites to Validate the data indicated in its Batch Request/s.  This will be done under the hood, with the <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="validation_result" text="Validation Results" /> that are generated being passed along to the Checkpoint's (optional) <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="action" text="Actions" /> for further processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you create your Checkpoints, you will be able to configure them to use specific Expectation Suites.  Other than setting up this configuration (or arranging to pass Expectation Suites at runtime) you will not need to directly interact with the Expectations themselves.  Instead, when you run your Checkpoint it will handle the use of the Expectations in any of its Expectation Suites to Validate the data indicated in its Batch Request/s.  This will be done under the hood, with the <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="validation_result" text="Validation Results" /> that are generated being passed along to the Checkpoint's (optional) <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="action" text="Actions" /> for further processing.
```

## Features

### Versatility out of the box

Great Expectations' built-in library includes more than 50 common Expectations, such as:

* `expect_column_values_to_not_be_null`
* `expect_column_values_to_match_regex`
* `expect_column_values_to_be_unique`
* `expect_column_values_to_match_strftime_format`
* `expect_table_row_count_to_be_between`
* `expect_column_median_to_be_between`

For a full list of available Expectations, please check out the [Expectation Gallery](https://greatexpectations.io/expectations).

### Customization

Expectations are especially useful when they capture critical aspects of data understanding that analysts and practitioners know based on its *semantic* meaning. It's common to want to extend Great Expectations with application or domain specific Expectations. For example:

```bash
expect_column_text_to_be_in_english
expect_column_value_to_be_valid_icd_code
```

These Expectations aren't included in the default set, but could be very useful for specific applications.

Fear not! Great Expectations is designed for customization and extensibility.

> Building custom Expectations is easy and allows your custom logic to become part of the validation, documentation, and even profiling workflows that make Great Expectations stand out. See the guide on [creating custom Expectations](/docs/guides/expectations/creating_custom_expectations/how_to_create_custom_expectations) for more information on building Expectations and updating <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="data_context" text="Data Context" /> configurations to automatically load <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="batch" text="Batches" /> of data with custom <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="data_asset" text="Data Assets" />Data Assets.

Reviewer: Just flagging that the links to creating Expectations docs may need to change in light of the work that is being done there.
```suggestion
Building custom Expectations is easy and allows your custom logic to become part of the validation, documentation, and even profiling workflows that make Great Expectations stand out. See the guide on [creating custom Expectations](/docs/guides/expectations/creating_custom_expectations/how_to_create_custom_expectations) for more information on building Expectations and updating <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="data_context" text="Data Context" /> configurations to automatically load <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="batch" text="Batches" /> of data with custom <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="data_asset" text="Data Assets" />.
```

### Distributional Expectations

Distributional Expectations rely on expected distributions or "partition objects", which are built from intervals for continuous data or categorical classes and their associated weights, in order to help identify when new datasets or samples may be different than expected.  You should use Distributional Expectations in the same way as other Expectations: to help accelerate identification of risks and changes to a modeled system or disruptions to a complex upstream data feed.

For more information, please see our [reference guide on Distributional Expectations](../reference/expectations/distributional_expectations.md).

> ### Conditional Expectations

Reviewer: I'm not sure it's worth diving into the detail, but to be explicit: all map (row-wise) expectations can be conditional. Currently this conditionality is only implemented for pandas. So whereas Distributional Expectations represent specific expectation types (e.g. `expect_column_kl_divergence_to_be_less_than`), Conditional Expectations represent a facet of map expectations (including things like `expect_column_values_to_be_in_set`).

Again, this detail might not be important here, but wanted to drop this for reference.

Author: I've added your expanded explanations to the Conditional and Distributional Expectations sections.  These changes will appear in the next commit.  The fact that Conditional Expectations are only available in Pandas is specified under the Limitations section, right below the Conditional Expectations section, but I've also added a note about it inside of the Conditional Expectations section.

The other occasion when you may want to edit an Expectation's configuration is when you need to edit the `result_format` of a <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="custom_expectation" text="Custom Expectation" />  The `result_format` parameter may be either a string or a dictionary which specifies the fields to return in `result`.  For further details, please see [our reference guide on the result_format parameter](../reference/expectations/result_format.md).

### Results

All Expectations return a JSON-serializable dictionary when evaluated, which consists of four standard (though optional, depending on the type of Expectation in question) arguments.  These are: `result_format`, `include_config`, `catch_exceptions`, and `meta`.  For a more detailed explanation as to what each of these arguments consists of and which Expectations use them, please see [our reference guide on standard arguments](../reference/expectations/standard_arguments.md).

## More details

### Expectation Concepts: Domain and Success Keys

> A **domain** makes it possible to address a specific set of data, such as a *table*, *query result*, *column* in a table or dataframe, or even a Metric computed on a previous Batch of data.

Reviewer: This definition seems a bit confusing, but I'm having a hard time thinking of something better.

The way I think of it, a domain describes the locale of data to which a metric or expectation applies. I don't love this definition either, though...

Author: I've added your definition as an expansion to the existing one.

A domain is defined by a set of key-value pairs. The **domain keys** are the keys that uniquely define the domain for an Expectation. They vary depending on the Expectatation; for example, many Expectations apply to data in a single `column`, but others apply to data from multiple columns or to properties that do not apply to a column at all.

> An Expectation also defines **success keys** that determine the values of its metrics and when the Expectation will succeed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An Expectation also defines **success keys** that specify the values of metrics that determine when the Expectation will succeed.
```
